.TH CAML2CSL 1 "Nov 1st 1996"

.SH NAME

caml2csl \- The Caml-Light to Caml-Special-Light and Objective-Caml translator

.SH SYNOPSIS

.B caml2csl
[
.BI \-bare
]
[
.BI \-c \ filename
]
[
.BI \-clib \ filename
]
[
.BI \-include \ directory
]
[
.BI \-nowarning
]
[
.BI \-o \ filename
]
[
.BI \-open \ module-set
]
[
.BI \-v
]
[
.BI \-verbose
]
[
.BI \-I \ directory
]
[
.BI \-L
]
[
.BI \-O \ module-set
]
[
.BI \-W
]
.I file ...


.SH DESCRIPTION

.B caml2csl
does the following translations (w.r.t. the extension of 
.IR file
):

.TP
.BI - \ modname.camli \ to \ csl_modname.mli
Translates the interface of
.I modname.
Note that the basename of the file may change if the module name begins with an upper case. The file
.I modname.zc
is generated. If
.I modname.mlc
exists, then the information it contains is loaded before translating
.I modname.camli.
.TP
.BI - \ modname.caml \ to \ csl_modname.ml
Translates the implementation of
.I modname.
In order to avoid some inconsistencies, caml2csl checks if
.I modname.zc
exists when the interface exists (file
.I modname.camli).
If not, caml2csl fails, because the interface must be translated first. When no interface is found, caml2csl checks the existence of
.I modname.mlc
that should be loaded before the translation (the
.I modname.zc
file is generated after the translation).
.TP
.BI - \ modname.mlc \ to \ modname.zc
Compiles translation informations of the user. It is not necessary to compile .mlc before .camli (when translating .camli, and if a .mlc is found, it is used to translate the .camli). This is usefull only when you want to make the conversion file of a module without having its sources.

.SH
To be able to translate the functions of the Caml-Light Standard Library, caml2csl needs a
.I core conversion file.
The core conversion file specifies the translation information for the core library of Caml-Light (for example how to translate builtin__int, etc). 


.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.BI \-bare
Tells caml2csl not to load any core conversion file. This option may be used to generate a .zlc file without the default translations.
.TP
.BI \-c \ filename
Tells caml2csl to compile
.IR filename
(generally with extension
.I .mlca)
as a core conversion file. See the option -o.
.TP
.BI \-clib \ filename
Name of the core conversion file to load. If no -clib option is specified, caml2csl uses the core conversion file created during the installation
.IR (std.zlc
by default).
.TP
.BI \-include \ directory
Adds
.IR directory
to the loadpath in order to find the 
core conversion file or the
.IR .zc
of the modules used by
.IR file.
Equivalent to the option -I.
.TP
.BI \-nowarning
Do not display warnings. Only those that will make compilation fail are mentioned. Equivalent to the option -W
.TP
.BI \-o \ filename
Name of output core conversion file (when compilimg a core conversion file with option -c). Default is 
.IR a.zlc.
The output file is to use as argument of the option -clib.
\.
.TP
.BI \-open \ module-set
Default open set (see 
.IB camlc (1)
for more information).
Equivalent to the option -O.
.TP
.BI \-v
displays version number of caml2csl.
.TP
.BI \-verbose
displays a lot of output, and do not remove object files when fails.
.TP
.BI \-I \ directory
Equivalent to the option -include.
.TP
.BI \-L
Equivalent to the option -verbose.
.TP
.BI \-O \ module-set
Equivalent to the option -open.
.TP
.BI \-W
Equivalent to the option -nowarning.

.SH SEE ALSO

.IR man/README
